# Domain Research

## Background Review

### The Role of Solar Energy in Humanitarian and Conflict-Affected Contexts

### 1. Introduction

Solar energy plays a key role in ensuring sustainable and equitable energy
access, particularly in regions affected by armed conflict, displacement, and
infrastructure destruction. Its decentralized nature, affordability, and rapid
deployability make it a powerful tool for humanitarian response and recovery
efforts.

### 2. Energy Poverty and Conflict Impact

As of 2024, over 130 million people were forcibly displaced due to war,
persecution, or disaster, including 33 million refugees and 63 million
internally displaced persons (IDPs) ([UNHCR,
2024](https://reporting.unhcr.org/global-appeal-2024-6383)). Access to food,
shelter, healthcare, and water are immediate needs—but all are energy-dependent.
Clean energy access is essential in both emergency and protracted displacement
settings for cooking, lighting, medical services, education, and safety.

- 80% of displaced people still rely on firewood or biomass for cooking ([WHO,
  2023](<https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/household-air->
  pollution-and-health)), exposing women and girls to safety risks and indoor
  air pollution.

- Nearly 90% of refugee settlements lack reliable electricity access ([GPA,
  2022](https://www.humanitarianenergy.org/assets/resources/SOHES.pdf)).

- Energy poverty worsens gender inequalities, increases environmental
  degradation, and limits livelihood and learning opportunities.

### 3. Solar Energy in Conflict and Post-Conflict Zones

Renewable energy, especially solar, has proven to be vital in fragile and war-
torn settings. Solar technologies can be rapidly deployed and maintained
locally, offering resilient energy for critical infrastructure:

- Mobile clinics and field hospitals powered by solar improve health outcomes in
  areas where traditional grids are non-functional.

- Solar lighting enhances safety in refugee camps and post-conflict rural areas,
  especially for women and children.

- Access to energy supports small-scale recovery efforts, such as water pumping,
  digital communication, and refrigeration of medicines.

While there are fewer large-scale examples due to the security risks in active
warzones, organizations such as UNHCR and the ICRC have implemented solar
microgrids and standalone solar systems in conflict-affected regions like South
Sudan, Syria, and parts of Ukraine.

### 4. Renewable Energy as a Pathway to Peace and Resilience

According to [CYIS, 2024](https://cyis.org), integrating solar energy into
humanitarian and peacebuilding strategies can:

- Promote cooperation and reduce tension over scarce resources;

- Foster community resilience by enabling shared energy management;

- Reduce dependency on diesel fuel, which is costly and dangerous to transport
  in war zones.

Access to solar energy can be perceived as a neutral, community-owned resource
that enables stability and recovery while fostering social cohesion.

### 5. Global Trends in Renewable Energy (Statistical Review of World Energy 2024)

- In 2023, solar energy accounted for 346 GW of newly installed capacity—75% of
  all new renewable energy.

- China, Europe, and the United States led solar deployment.

- Still, fossil fuels represented 81.5% of global primary energy consumption.

- Over 750 million people worldwide lack electricity access, with conflict zones
  disproportionately represented.

Source: [Energy Institute Statistical Review
2024](https://www.energyinst.org/statistical-review)

### 6. Insights from Our World in Data

- Solar power accounts for around 5% of total electricity production globally,
  growing faster than any other source.

- Solar generation costs have dropped by 89% since 2010.

- Energy inequality remains stark: per capita energy use in developing nations
  is six times lower than in North America.

Source: [Our World in Data — Renewable
Energy](https://ourworldindata.org/renewable-energy)

### 7. Conclusion

Solar energy is more than a technical solution—it is a humanitarian and
peacebuilding tool. In conflict-affected settings where centralized
infrastructure has collapsed or is unreliable, solar provides an immediate,
scalable path toward sustainable recovery and resilience.

To be effective, solar solutions must be integrated into broader energy access
strategies and peacebuilding frameworks. This includes:

- Prioritizing local ownership and maintenance;

- Building market-based models that continue post-aid;

- Aligning with national recovery and climate goals.

In war-affected regions, access to solar energy is not an option—it is a
necessity for survival, recovery, and long-term peace.
